---
layout:     post
title:      The Date in Java 8
categories: pattern
---

##Why do we need new Java Date Time API?

Before we start looking at the Java 8 Date Time API, let’s see why do we need a new API for this. 
There have been several problems with the existing date and time related classes in java, some of them are:

1. Java Date Time classes are not defined consistently, we have Date Class in both `java.util` as well as `java.sql` packages. Again formatting and parsing classes are defined in `java.text` package.
2. `java.util.Date` contains both date and time, whereas `java.sql.Date` contains only date. Having this in `java.sql` package doesn’t make sense. Also both the classes have same name, that is a very bad design itself.
3. There are no clearly defined classes for time, timestamp, formatting and parsing. We have `java.text.DateFormat` abstract class for parsing and formatting need. Usually `SimpleDateFormat` class is used for parsing and formatting.
4. All the Date classes are mutable, so they are not thread safe. It’s one of the biggest problem with `Java Date and Calendar` classes.
5. `Date` class doesn’t provide internationalization, there is no timezone support. So `java.util.Calendar` and `java.util.TimeZone` classes were introduced, but they also have all the problems listed above.

There are some other issues with the methods defined in `Date` and `Calendar` classes but above problems make it clear that a robust Date Time API was needed in Java. That’s why `Joda Time` played a key role as a quality replacement for Java Date Time requirements.


## Java 8 Date
Java 8 Date Time API is JSR-310 implementation. It is designed to overcome all the flaws in the legacy date time implementations. 
Some of the design principles of new Date Time API are:

1. **Immutability**: All the classes in the new Date Time API are immutable and good for multithreaded environments.
2. **Separation of Concerns**: The new API separates clearly between human readable date time and machine time (unix timestamp). It defines separate classes for Date, Time, DateTime, Timestamp, Timezone etc.
3. **Clarity**: The methods are clearly defined and perform the same action in all the classes. For example, to get the current instance we have now() method. There are format() and parse() methods defined in all these classes rather than having a separate class for them. All the classes use **Factory Pattern and Strategy Pattern** for better handling. Once you have used the methods in one of the class, working with other classes won’t be hard.
4. **Utility operations**: All the new Date Time API classes comes with methods to perform common tasks, such as plus, minus, format, parsing, getting separate part in date/time etc.
5. **Extendable**: The new Date Time API works on ISO-8601 calendar system but we can use it with other non ISO calendars as well.

##Java 8 Date Time API Packages

Java 8 Date Time API consists of following packages.

1. `java.time Package`: This is the base package of new Java Date Time API. All the major base classes are part of this package, such as LocalDate, LocalTime, LocalDateTime, Instant, Period, Duration etc. All of these classes are immutable and thread safe. Most of the times, these classes will be sufficient for handling common requirements.
2. `java.time.chrono Package`: This package defines generic APIs for non ISO calendar systems. We can extend AbstractChronology class to create our own calendar system.
3. `java.time.format Package`: This package contains classes used for formatting and parsing date time objects. Most of the times, we would not be directly using them because principle classes in java.time package provide formatting and parsing methods.
4. `java.time.temporal Package`: This package contains temporal objects and we can use it for find out specific date or time related to date/time object. For example, we can use these to find out the first or last day of the month. You can identify these methods easily because they always have format “withXXX”.
5. `java.time.zone Package`: This package contains classes for supporting different time zones and their rules.

##Java 8 Date Time API Examples
####LocalDate
`LocalDate` is an immutable class that represents Date with default format of **yyyy-MM-dd**. We can use `now()` method to get the current date. 
We can also provide input arguments for year, month and date to create LocalDate instance. This class provides overloaded method for now() where we can pass `ZoneId` for getting date in specific time zone. This class provides the same functionality as `java.sql.Date`. Let’s look at a simple example for it’s usage.

```java
        //Current Date
        LocalDate today = LocalDate.now();
        System.out.println("Current Date = "+today);
        //Creating LocalDate by providing input arguments
        LocalDate firstDay_2016 = LocalDate.of(2016, Month.JANUARY, 1);
        System.out.println("Specific Date = "+firstDay_2016);

        //Current date in "Asia/Kolkata", you can get it from ZoneId javadoc
        LocalDate todayKolkata = LocalDate.now(ZoneId.of("Asia/Hong_Kong"));
        System.out.println("Current Date in IST = "+todayKolkata);

        //java.time.zone.ZoneRulesException: Unknown time-zone ID: IST
        //LocalDate todayIST = LocalDate.now(ZoneId.of("IST"));

        //Getting date from the base date i.e 01/01/1970
        LocalDate dateFromBase = LocalDate.ofEpochDay(365);
        System.out.println("365th day from base date = "+dateFromBase);

        LocalDate hundredDay2016 = LocalDate.ofYearDay(2016, 100);
        System.out.println("100th day of 2016 = "+hundredDay2016);
///////output/////////

Current Date = 2016-06-15
Specific Date = 2016-01-01
Current Date in IST = 2016-11-25
365th day from base date = 1971-01-01
100th day of 2016 = 2016-04-09
```

####LocalTime